Sheev Palpatine[3] (also known by his Sith identity Darth Sidious and publicly as Senator Palpatine, then Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, and later Emperor Palpatine) is a fictional character and is the primary antagonist of Episodes I-VI in the Star Wars franchise,[4] mainly portrayed by Ian McDiarmid. In the original trilogy, he is depicted as the extremely aged, pale-faced and cloaked Emperor of the Galactic Empire and the Sith master of Darth Vader. In the prequel trilogy, he is portrayed as a charismatic Senator in early old age from Naboo who uses machiavellian deception and political manipulation to rise to the position of Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic before transforming the Republic into the Empire.

Though outwardly appearing to be a well-intentioned public servant and supporter of democracy prior to being Emperor,[5] Palpatine's true identity is actually Darth Sidious, the Dark Lord of the Sith—a cult of practitioners of the dark side of the Force previously thought to have been extinct for a millennium, and master of Darth Maul and Count Dooku.[5] As his Sith identity, Palpatine incrementally increases the executive branch's power and masterminds the Clone Wars conflict. Manipulating both the Republic and the Separatist governments, Palpatine, as Chancellor, uses the conflict as a convenient pretext to maintain a military–industrial complex and gain more political power by abusing his "emergency powers" to stay in office long after his term has expired.

Palpatine ultimately reorganizes the Republic into the Galactic Empire, declares martial law, and declares himself Emperor. Palpatine outlaws the Jedi Order—whom he had accused of high treason for an attempted assassination, for having instigated the Clone Wars, and for conspiring to seize power—having most purged through Order 66. He also manipulates Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker into turning to the dark side and serving as his new apprentice Darth Vader. Palpatine rules the galaxy for over two decades before his reign is brought to an end in the Battle of Endor when Vader turns on him and kills him in order to save his son, Luke Skywalker who was being electrocuted by Palpatine.

Since the initial theatrical run of Return of the Jedi, Palpatine has become a widely recognized popular culture symbol of evil, sinister deception, sadistic cruelty, dictatorship, tyranny, and the subversion of democracy. 